#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 2cm
\topmargin 2.5cm
\rightmargin 1.5cm
\bottommargin 2cm
\headsep 0.5cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
The China Study
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
T.
 Colin Campbell and Thomas M.
 Campbell
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Background and Personal History
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the fist part of the book he tells of his history on deary farm as a
 child and how at that time the thinking was that the more protein the better
 and that cow milk is good as it has calcium.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He also goes into detail on the academic background and atmosphere at the
 time.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Then he tells us of his time in the Philippians here his goal was to aid
 in solving nutrition problems for the children over there by adding protein
 to there diet.
 The problem was that he noticed that the better off children had more liver
 cancer.
 Eventually he tracked this down to the relative more protein that they
 were eating long side alphatoxin that originated from a mold that grows
 on peanuts.
 He then found a paper from India that found that mice that had more protein
 were more likely to get liver cancer.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Part
The China Study
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Lab Work
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As this paper from India made no seance in the eyes of the researchers of
 the time, but did lineup with his observations of the children he saw,
 he set out to test this in the lab for himself, along with students and
 team.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The findings were:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
When feeding mice 5% milk protein (casein), the level of alphatoxin did
 not matter, the mice did not get cancer (in fact focee).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
When they fed the mice 20% (of calorie) from casein they all got cancer
 when exposed to alphatoxin.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Plant protein did not have this effect.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
They could 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

turn
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 cancer on/off in the same mice by switching them from one diet to the other
 including putting the cancer in total remission.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
The same effect was produced in rats and with pancreatic cancer with response
 to HBV (Hepatitis B Virus).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
There are many more experiments described in the book as they did experiments
 for some decades.
 This includes following mice for over 2 years and playing with the diet
 in that time and many more.All experiments indicate that animal protein
 along with exposure to a carcinogen will case cancer while the absence
 of such protein will prevent the cancer regardless of the presence of the
 carcinogen.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
The China Study
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is the well known study ran in rural China that took data on the prevalence
 of cancer and other health issues in rural China and correlated them with
 many data points collected on the same people with respect to there diet.
 In short these correlations lined up perfectly with the data from the lab
 experiments indicating that the same effects are present in humans.
 The power of this is that this is not only a large epidemiological study.
 Its results also have an experimental causation effect demonstrated in
 the lab.
 Although this is not a double blind placebo controlled crossover study.
 The strength of the effect is high due to the alignment to the lab tests
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
The problem with the Atkins diet
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The first point of all the low carbohydrate diets is that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

America has been testing this for the last so and so decades, and it is
 not proving to be a good idea
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 The one problem with this statement is that although true that the recommendati
on is that Americans eat a low fat diet, this is not what has been happening.Ther
e are studies proving that the Atkins diet works to reduce weight in obese
 people, and even reduce there cholesterol levels.
 What is not so publicly displayed is that in the studies the caloric restrictio
n was very harsh (35% under the regular caloric intake 2250 -> 1450).
 This is not sustainable.This is not to mention that in the same study 68%
 of the people reported constipation 63% reported bad breath 51% reported
 headaches 10% reported hair loss.
 So this is not looking to healthy, is it? In addition they refer to other
 papers where the same diet in children cased calcium oxalate to be present
 in there urine, which could lead to kidney stones.
 IT could lead to women missing there period Subjects having low vitamin
 levels and/or high cholesterol.
 The researchers found high levels of calcium in subjects unite which could
 be associates with bone density loss.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In short not a good thing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Part
Disease of Affluence
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this part he goes in to various studies by other researchers on how a
 whole food plant based (WFPB) diet cat stop and/or reverse/heal some of
 the most common and deadliest diseases of the west.He calls these diseases
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

disease of affluence
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 as they arise from affluence of over rich foods.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Heart
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Heart he refers mainly to the work by Dr.
 Caldwell Esselstyn published in 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Prevent and Reverse Heart Disease: The Revolutionary, Scientifically Proven,
 Nutrition-Based Cure
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and to work by Dr Dean Ornish.
 Both have an extensive and deep research showing how the treat hear disease
 with a WFPB diet.
 In Ornishe's work the diet is accommodated with stress management practices
 manly meditation.
 In Esselstyn's work there are group meetings every two weeks.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Obesity
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next there is a short chapter about obesity.
 The main point is that a WFPB diet will help one loos weight as it is not
 caloriclly dense, so you don't need to count calories etc...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Diabetes
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the chapter on diabetes he sites some epidemiological studies that imply
 that type 2 diabetes can be prevented and revered by a WFPB diet.
 These are both world wide studies and national studies including e.g.
 the Adventist study.
 Following this he resents a number of controlled intervention studies show
 how a WFPB diet can reverse type 2 diabetes.
 It is of interest that there is also a study that has three groups, one
 control that had placebo drug and standard lifestyle guidance, the second
 with the same lifestyle instruction and a real drug and the third with
 moderate WFPB diet and some exercise.
 All participants were pre-diabetic.
 After 3 years the third group had 58% less cases of diabetes that the control
 and the second group had 31% less than the control.
 So the drug works but diet works even better.
 Note that this was with 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

moderate
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 WFPB and not proper WFPB.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It is hard to explain why even the researchers that do the studies don't
 recommend the WFPB diet.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Cancer
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the cancer chapter he looks into a number of common cancers.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Breast Cancer
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It is well established that prolonged exposure to female hormones (estrogen
 and progesterone) are associated with a higher rate of breast cancer.
 This is relevant as women how consume animal products enter puberty earlier
 and reach menopause later.
 Resulting in many more years of exposure.In addition they have a higher
 level of hormones through there lives.
 In addition they have a higher level of cholesterol resulting in them having
 four factors putting them at higher risk for breast cancer
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Earlier puberty
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Later menopause
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Higher levels of hormone through life
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Higher levels of cholesterol
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Nevertheless, the main paradigm is that breast (and other cancers) are created
 by environmental toxins and exposure to them.
 He presents a number of papers that seem to support this but also some
 that don't support it.
 The problem with all these papers is that non of them give much attention
 to diet thus, nothing significant can be said about diet from these studies.
 Never the less from his epidemiological study it seems that there is a
 correlation between a WFPB diet and lower rates of breast cancer.
 Still this is a correlation and no intervention study was presented in
 this chapter.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What about BRCA-1/2 gens? Well women with these mutations are at greater
 risk but as no studies were done on the interaction with diet we can not
 sat anything definitive.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Screening.
 This cases the wrong impression that the 5 year survival has gone up, while
 when infarct happened s that the detection was pushed back.
 This created a situation that many women are being treated for a disease
 that could never hit them.
 More over the drugs proscribed to them although effective, case other problems.
 The question is why use a drug to reduce the effect of estrogen when you
 can use diet to reduce the amount of estrogen in the first place.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Rectal-Colon Cancers
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There is a fiery debate on the role of fiber in preventing this cancer.
 The bottom line is that we will most likely never know the ole of fiber
 in this as
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
There are so many types of fiber and it is impossible to separate the affect
 every one of them has.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
The intake of fiber goes up when the intake of animal products goes down.
 Thus, we can not know if the effect is from the increase of fiber or the
 decrease of animal products (fat and protein)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The bottom line is that a diet rich in a variety of fibers and low on animal
 protein and fat is found to be protective in epidemiological studies.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Screening is a simple matter that has been found to be safe and effective.
 There seems to be a statistical connection between having polyps removed
 (or absent) and a lower case rate of these cancers.
 Also the mechanism that created polyps is similar to that of cancer.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Prostate Cancer
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It has been shown in epidemiological studies that prostate cancer is correlated
 with the consumption of milk and animal products.
 In this case there is also a mechanism we can point out.
 On one hand the consumption of animal protein induces the over release
 of IGF-1 to the blood.
 IGF-1 is a hormone that promotes growth and division of cells and prevents
 apoptosis.
 This is clearly a cancer creating step.In addition milk with its calcium
 partially blocked the conversion of vitamin D3 to D3-OH (the active form).
 D3-OH is also involved in inducing apoptosis.
 Suppressed vitamin D levels are detrimental as it is involved in preventing
 many illnesses e.g.
 cancer, osteoporosis and autoimmune conditions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Dr.
 Dean Ornish conducted a study not unlike the one he did for hard disease
 on men with initial prostate cancer who opted for watch and wait.
 One group got WFPB diet and the rest of his treatment including meditation
 and stress management.
 the other got standard care.
 In the WFPB group PSA levels went down in three month.
 after 12 month 27% of the control group had to start treatment while only
 5% of the WFPB group did.
 For comparison statins reduce heard disease by 2-3%.
 This coupled with the observational studies clenches the argument for WFPB
 diet for prostate cancer.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Autoimmune Diseases
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Autoimmune diseases are a condition were the body attacked itself with the
 immune system.
 This can happen in a multitude of ways but more often than not the mechanize
 is that a foreign protein enters the body.
 The body creates an antibody against it.
 This antibody 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

fits
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 some 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

self
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 cells.
 For some reason this happens more with cow's milk
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Type I Diabetes
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In type 1 diabetes it was found that there is a genetic inclination to getting
 the disease.
 However when exposed to cows milk at an early age people with this inclination
 have a much higher chance of getting the condition.
 It seems that under certain conditions when a child is moved to cows milk
 at an early age, some of the cow's milk protein leaks through the gut to
 the blood stream.
 There it attacked by the immune system and antibodies are created.
 If this happens repetitively.
 a load of antibodies is created that also attack some of the cells in the
 pancreas.
 There are a number of papers some correlating type 1 diabetes to countries
 that consume more milk, some that shoe that there are more antibodies for
 cows milk in the blood of diabetic people.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
MS
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The picture for MS is very similar.
 The frustrating thing is that there is research both on diabetes and on
 MS linking it to cow's milk.
 In the case of MS there is a 34 year human study showing that a low saturated
 fat diet prevents the degradation of the disease.
 Further studies have shown that it is not the fat but the animal source
 of it that determines the outcome.
 This for some reason is not followed up by the media or even by the organizatio
ns that represent the people with the conditions e.g.
 the American MS association 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
